# The Art of Unix Programming
## by Eric Steven Raymond

Copyright © 2003 Eric S. Raymond

This book and its on-line version are distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivs 1.0 license, with the additional
proviso that the right to publish it on paper for sale or other
for-profit use is reserved to Pearson Education, Inc. A reference copy
of this license may be found at
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/1.0/legalcode>.

AIX, AS/400, DB/2, OS/2, System/360, MVS, VM/CMS, and IBM PC are
trademarks of IBM. Alpha, DEC, VAX, HP-UX, PDP, TOPS-10, TOPS-20, VMS,
and VT-100 are trademarks of Compaq. Amiga and AmigaOS are trademarks of
Amiga, Inc. Apple, Macintosh, MacOS, Newton, OpenDoc, and OpenStep are
trademarks of Apple Computers, Inc. ClearCase is a trademark of Rational
Software, Inc. Ethernet is a trademark of 3COM, Inc. Excel, MS-DOS,
Microsoft Windows and PowerPoint are trademarks of Microsoft, Inc. Java.
J2EE, JavaScript, NeWS, and Solaris are trademarks of Sun Microsystems.
SPARC is a trademark of SPARC international. Informix is a trademark of
Informix software. Itanium is a trademark of Intel. Linux is a trademark
of Linus Torvalds. Netscape is a trademark of AOL. PDF and PostScript
are trademarks of Adobe, Inc. UNIX is a trademark of The Open Group. The
photograph of Ken and Dennis in [*Chapter 2*](#54)appears courtesy of
Bell Labs/Lucent Technologies. The epigraph on the Portability chapter
is from the Bell System Technical Journal, v57 \#6 part 2 (July-Aug.
1978) pp.

2021-2048 and is reproduced with the permission of Bell Labs/Lucent
Technologies.


## Dedica

A Ken Thompson e Dennis Ritchie, perché mi avete inspirato.


[next](prefazione.md)